Our computational model (code available at http://www.github.com/julianje/bishop) consists of two components. The first is a generative model that, given a cost and a reward function, probabilistically produces utility-maximizing behaviors. The second is a mechanism that uses the generative model to recover the costs and rewards underlying an agent’s observable actions via Bayesian inference (or more precisely, a Monte Carlo sampling-based approximation to Bayesian inference known as likelihood weighting; see Tenenbaum et al., 2011, Shi et al., 2010 for an overview of this approach).
Implementing the Naïve Utility Calculus requires formalizing the ingredients of intentional action and choice that make up the utility computations in Eq. (1): notions of plans and outcomes, and their associated costs and rewards. Here we adopt the standard engineering formalism of probabilistic state-space planning, where a plan comprises a sequence of actions (or a policy for generating those actions) that is expected to take the agent through a sequence of states of the world, and an intended outcome is the target sequence of states and actions that the agent is planning to achieve. In many simple settings for planning, costs are associated with each action taken and rewards are associated with goal states: the final state in the outcome intended from a given plan. But in general, both costs and rewards may depend on both states and actions: A plan may be costly because it is expected to pass through states the agent finds aversive or painful, or because the actions needed to traverse states are intrinsically difficult or otherwise costly; end goals may be the most typical source of rewards but certain actions or intermediate states as subgoals may themselves also be intrinsically rewarding. In the remainder of the paper we thus adopt a formalism where both cost and reward functions are defined over combinations these lower-level action and state primitives, and we define specific cost and reward functions on state-action pairs that capture the intuitive notions of varying costs of plans and rewards for intended outcomes appropriate in different behavior contexts.
Our model builds on other utility-based models of action understanding (e.g. Baker et al., 2017, Lucas et al., 2014) by fleshing out the representation of how people intuitively understand agents as making choices and planning actions. We do this through a hierarchical representation spanning four levels (Fig. 2): desires (formalized as a reward function), goals (formalized as states of the world that the agent believes yield rewards; e.g. believed locations of objects), intentions (formalized as ordered sequences of goals intended to maximize utilities), and actions (mappings from states to actions which, when executed, sequentially fulfill each goal in the intention). Only the final lowest level of actions is directly observable to others. Under this framework, action understanding consists of observing other people’s actions, and using the assumption of utility maximization to infer the three higher levels of this hierarchy (desires, goals, and intentions), as well as the underlying costs and rewards. The hierarchical representation supports the understanding that agents can have many desires which the agent may forego because the costs are too high, because the rewards are not high enough, or because of a combination of both. Furthermore, it enables observers to distinguish between a number of different abstract states of mind, such as wanting an object (assigning it a high utility in the moment) and liking an object (assigning it a high reward in general).
2.1. Generative model
Our formal model builds on a general architecture for goal inference based on a principle of efficiency shared with recent proposals such as Baker et al., 2017, Lucas et al., 2014, and inspired by the framework theories of mind that developmental psychologists have posited to explain children’s action explanations (Wellman, 1990, Wellman, 2014). Fig. 2a illustrates this architecture, and Fig. 2b shows how our present model extends this approach to reason about the specific roles that costs and rewards play in the hierarchical computations leading ultimately to agents’ actions: rewards combined with beliefs determine candidate goals, and these goals integrated with action costs give rise to specific intentions to act. Fig. 2c-d illustrate this model applied to one of the scenarios that we test in our experiments. We adopted scenarios designed to minimize the role of any specific prior knowledge participants might bring to the task, and instead to draw only on the general schemas of rational action planning formalized in the Naïve Utility Calculus. In this paradigm, an astronaut (shown from a bird’s eye view) navigates an alien planet that has different types of terrains (Fig. 3a) that may be more or less exhausting to travel through. The astronaut ultimately wants to reach her space station, but there also one or more care packages that the astronaut can pick up if she wishes. Given the astronaut’s actions, the task is to infer how exhausting the astronaut finds it to cross different terrains (the costs), and how much she likes each care package (the rewards).
In explaining our generative model, we find it most natural to begin in the bottom of the planning hierarchy, by describing how planning turns intentions into action policies. We then explain how the model builds intentions by computing and maximizing utilities.
2.1.1. From intentions to action policies
We define intentions as an ordered sequence of goals the agent plans to pursue, where each goal corresponds to reaching a target position in the map. In Fig. 1c-d, for instance, the agent’s intention is to collect the orange care package and to go to the space station, in that order. An intention’s utility is given the sum of rewards the agent obtains in completing each goal, minus the total cost the agent incurs to complete these goals (Eq. (1)).
We determine how agents complete goals (and, consequently, the cost associated with completing each goal) through Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), a standard mathematical framework in AI applications (Sutton & Barto, 1998) for describing how agents can act to maximize expected rewards in simple worlds. While past work has used MDPs to model an agent’s full planning process (Baker et al., 2009), here we use them in a more restricted way. In our framework, MDPs serve to determine how to reach specific goals. Consequently, each potential goal is associated with its individual special-purpose MDP that uses a single reward associated with the target goal rather than having access to all of the agent’s rewards. Thus, MDPs are used to plan movement in space, but do not play a role in deciding which goals to pursue.
In MDPs, the world is represented as a set of possible states, with each state capturing the physical environment and the agent’s location in space S. In a 7x7 world (like the one shown in Fig. 2c), for example, the state space consists of 49 states, each capturing the agent’s position in the map. At each discrete time step, the agent can take one of eight actions: move in one of the four cardinal directions, or move in one of the four diagonal directions. Although in MDPs actions can change the world probabilistically, here we assume that actions deterministically move agents in their intended direction (except on map borders, where actions that would take the agent off the map do not change the state). Whenever the agent takes an action, they incur a cost and they may obtain a reward.
We define cost functions, , as mappings from combinations of actions and states onto real values. All actions incur a cost determined by the type of terrain the agent is in (e.g., in Fig. 2c, the astronaut finds all gray terrain to be equally costly to navigate through). Formally, for all , whenever  and represent states where the agent is in the same type of terrain. Because the four diagonal actions produce longer movements, , when  is a diagonal action and is not (where  is derived from the Pythagorean theorem).
We define reward functions, , as mappings from combinations of actions and states onto real values. Only the MDPs goal state has a reward different from 0. For instance, in the map in Fig. 1c, the MDP responsible for determining how to get to the space station, has a cost associated with each terrain, and a single reward in the space station is (on the middle right end of the map). Similarly, in the same map, the MDP responsible for determining how to get to the white care package has the same costs as the previous MDP, but now with a single reward where the white care package is located.
Using this formulation, we can compute a function that maps states to actions, , called a policy, which, when pursued, reaches the goal state as efficiently as possible. In the MDP framework, this policy can be computed through several different algorithms, any of which converges to the same answer. The Naïve Utility Calculus requires observers to be able to reason about efficient goal-directed actions, but it does not place any constraints on the specific algorithm that must be used to compute efficiency. Here we use value iteration, which constructs the policy by solving the recursive equation
(2)
where  is a state’s optimal value,  is the probability that the agent will be in state  when she takes action  in state , and 
∊
 is a discount parameter that guarantees that the equation converges (see Sutton & Barto, 1998 for a detailed tutorial on MDPs and value iteration). Intuitively, the value function (Eq. (2)) assigns each state a value corresponding to the goal-specific utility (the difference between the rewards and costs) that agents obtains, plus the expected future value, provided that the agent will take the best possible action. Having computed each state’s value, the optimal policy is given by
(3)
That is, the optimal policy maps states to actions by maximizing expected value. Because people do not necessarily expect other agents to always act optimally, we relax the assumption that agents act optimally (Eq. (3)) to an expectation that agents are more likely to choose good, over bad, actions. Formally:
(4)
This decision rule is known as softmaxing or a Boltzmann policy. is a parameter that determines the agent’s “rationality.” When  is close to 0, the policy selection becomes optimal and the agent always takes the best action (i.e. Eq. (4) converges to Eq. (3)). As  increases, the policy selection becomes noisier (i.e. Eq. (4) converges to a uniform distribution over actions). Related work has attempted to characterize how the parameter  relates to people’s psychological intuitions about rationality (Kryven, Ullman, Cowan, & Tenenbaum, 2015). Because this is not the focus of our model, we did not fit this parameter to participant judgments and we set it to 0.1. For a value this low,  has minimal influence on our model results, but, as we describe in the next section, it enables our model to infer the underlying costs and rewards with fewer samples than would otherwise be required.
Finally, having a set of MDPs, each associated with a goal in the agent’s intention, fulfilling the intention reduces to executing the goal-specific MDPs for each goal until all of them are complete.
2.1.2. From desires to intentions and goals
Having defined how agents transform intentions into actions, we next describe how agents form their intentions given their desires.
At the highest level, we formalize desires as rewards associated with having different objects and/or helping different agents. These rewards, combined with the location of the objects or agents who need help determines the space of possible goals. The event in Fig. 1c, for instance, has three goals: collect the top care package, collect the middle care package, and go to the space station. As described above, each of these goals is associated with its own individual MDP-based planner that transforms the goal into actions (see section above): one for reaching the top object, one for reaching the middle object, and one for reaching the space station.
The space of goals next determines the agent’s space of intentions, consisting of ordered sequences of goals. Rather than considering every possible intention, our model only considers those that satisfy certain context-specific constraints (formalized as simple mappings from the space of intentions onto True/False values). For instance, in the scenario in Fig. 2b, requiring that the astronaut end in the space station can be implemented as a constraint that only considers intentions where this space station is the final goal. In the event in Fig. 1c, the application of this constraints results in five possible intentions: “go to space station”, “get top care package and go to space station”, “get middle care package and go to space station”, “get top care package, get middle care package, and go to space station”, and “get middle care package, get top care package, and go to space station.”
Each intention’s utility is given by the sum of rewards associated with each goal, minus the sum of the costs that the agent needs to incur to complete the goals in the specified order (Eq. (1)). We assume that agents select an intention through probabilistic utility maximization, such that the probability of selecting intention I is given by
(5)
Thus, our model applies a graded expectation for utility maximization at an action level (softmaxed action selection in Eq. (4)) and at a choice level (softmaxed intention selection in Eq. (5)). This probabilistic utility maximization at the choice level gives the model a graded expectation over relative utilities.1 As with the parameter  (Eq. (4)), the parameter  (Eq. (5)) was also not fit to participant judgments and it was set to 0.01. Our model architecture and publicly available code allow easy exploration of how expectations for rational action and rational choice influence mental state inferences in the Naïve Utility Calculus.
After the intention is selected through Eq. (5), actions are produced by completing each goal sequentially, with each goal executed under its autonomous controller specific to that goal solved through an MDP (see from intentions to action policies section).
2.1.3. Summary of generative model
The complete planning process, from desires to actions, is illustrated in Fig. 2c-d. In Fig. 2c, the astronaut initially lands on the middle left side of the map and she has to make her way to the space station at the middle right side of the map. There is a white care package in the middle of the map, and an orange care package in the top middle area of the map. Here, the astronaut navigated around the blue terrain and she collected the contents from the orange care package. Fig. 2d shows how this behavior is explained by the generative model. The agent has perfect knowledge about the location of the care packages, the space station, and the terrains, so her world belief corresponds to the true state of the world. The agent obtains rewards by collecting the care packages, or reaching the space station. Thus, the space of goals corresponds to the states of the world where the agent can collect the care packages or where the space station is. These goals, combined with the costs, determine the astronaut’s intention. Once the intention has been selected, the action policy associated with each goal is executed sequentially.
To summarize, any state in the world where the agent may obtain a reward is associated with a potential goal. This space of goals, combined with context-specific constraints (such as being able to pursue one goal, or having to always complete a specific goal at the end), determines the space of intentions. Each intention is an ordered sequence of goals, and its utility is given by the sum of the goal’s rewards minus the costs that the agent would incur to complete these goals in the specified order (Eq. (1)). The costs are computed through a set of goal-specific MDPs that determine what actions the agent should take to achieve an individual goal (Eqs. (2)–(4)). An intention is then selected through probabilistic utility maximization (Eq. (5)), and this final intention is transformed into actions by executing the action policy (Eq. (4)) associated with each goal (obtained through each goal’s MDP).
2.2. Inference over the generative model
Our generative model transforms cost and reward functions into actions. Normally only actions are observable, and costs and rewards must be inferred. We posit that people can perform (approximate) Bayesian inference over this model to infer the unobservable costs and rewards given a sequence of observable actions. This approach has proved successful in past models of social reasoning (e.g. Baker et al., 2009, Baker et al., 2017, Lucas et al., 2014, Verma and Rao, 2005, Hawthorne-Madell & Goodman, 2015). Given a set of observed actions, the posterior probability of the cost and reward functions is given by
(6)
where  is the prior probability over agents’ cost and reward functions and  is the likelihood that an agent with given costs and rewards would take the observed actions. In our design, we use novel terrains and objects, allowing us to use uniform priors. The likelihood term is given by the probability that the generative model would generate the observed actions, given the costs and rewards. Formally:
(7)
where  is the probability that the agent has unobservable intention I given the costs and rewards, and  is the probability that the agent would take the observable actions A given the selected intention I. Eq. (7) shows how the Naïve Utility Calculus captures two types of rationality.  captures the expectation for rational choice (selecting an intention that maximizes utilities; Eq. (5)), and  captures the expectation for rational action (taking actions so that the intention minimizes costs and thus produces the expected utilities; Eq. (4)).
In our implementation, we solve Eq. (6) through Monte Carlo samples of cost and reward functions. Our application of softmax at a choice and at an action level enables us to infer the cost and reward functions with fewer samples. Under a strict assumption of utility maximization, only cost and reward functions where the agents’ actions yield the highest utility produce positive probabilities. Consequently, most samples have probability 0. By softmaxing utility maximization, cost and reward functions that are far away from the true underlying costs and rewards have near zero probability, but this probability increases as the sampled functions get closer to values under which the agent has truly maximized utilities. Thus, through softmax, cost and reward functions under which the actions are reasonable, even if they are not optimal, reveal the agent’s underlying costs and rewards.
As in previous Bayesian models of human action understanding, but even more so for the more complex planning-based inferences our model considers, we do not expect that human observers will be exactly or explicitly implementing the computations specified in Eqs. (6) and (7). For instance, it would be sufficient both for everyday action understanding, and for the purposes of our modeling here, if people were able to approximate the likelihood (Eq. (7)) with one or a few high-probability plans rather than a sum over all possible plans. In our model, we approximate the posterior distribution through Monte Carlo likelihood weighting: we first sample n cost and reward functions from the prior distribution and compute the likelihood that each sample produces the observed actions. Under this approach, the prior information is encoded in the frequency and distribution of the samples, and the likelihood is integrated as a weighting factor.
